# Deltacloud Drivers

Deltacloud provides drivers for a growing number of popular clouds. All drivers
can handle a set of standard operations, some of them also support a number of
optional operations to expose the features of specific clouds more closely. The
drivers and their capabilities are:

<table providers></table>

## Setting up the code

To set up a Deltacloud core and the drivers, install the
[deltacloud-core][coregem] Ruby gem:

[coregem]: http://rubygems.org/gems/deltacloud-core

    # gem install deltacloud-core

RPM package will be available soon.

## Launch the server

The server is launched with the `deltacloudd` command and pass it the name
of the driver you want to use:

    $ deltacloudd -i mock

This will start a webserver running the mock driver on
`http://localhost:3001/api`; you can simply browse to that URL to get a
pretty view of the objects the driver deals with.

### EC2 Driver

For the Amazon EC2 you need to install the `amazon-ec2` Ruby gem:

    # gem install amazon-ec2

When using the driver for Amazon EC2, the credentials passed in
response to the HTTP 401 authentication challenge should be your
*access_key* and *secret_access_key*

These credentials may be found on the [Access Identifiers](http://aws-portal.amazon.com/gp/aws/developer/account/index.html?action=access-key)
page at Amazon AWS.

### RHEV-M Driver

The RHEV-M driver needs to be installed on a Windows machine which has the
RHEV-M Powershell API installed and configured. Assuming the directory
structure above is followed, you should copy the file
deltacloud/deltacloud-driver-rhevm/config/rhevm_config.yaml.EXAMPLE to be
rhevm_config.yaml and edit the file woith the domain you are logging into.
The username and pasword is provided via the API.

The actual RHEVM instance you are connecting to is controlled by
the RHEVM.dll.config file which is referenced from the profile.ps1
file located in My Documents/WindowsPowershell directory

### Rackspace Driver

When using the Rackspace-cloud driver (Rackspace cloud used to be called
"Mosso") - the password in a HTTP 401 challenge should be your API key, NOT
your rackspace account password.  (you can get the API-key, or generate a
new one, from the rackspace console).

### RimuHosting

Further details coming soon.

### OpenNebula

When using the [OpenNebula](http://www.opennebula.org/) driver, the
credentials passed in response to the HTTP 401 authentication challenge
should be your OpenNebula user and password.

The address, on which the OCCI server is listening, needs to be defined in
an environment variable called OCCI_URL.
