---
title: Deltacloud - Contribute
extension: html
filter:
  - markdown
  - outline
---
Help make Deltacloud better
===========================

<toc class="toc" numbering="off" toc_style="ul" toc_range="h2-h3" />

All development of Deltacloud takes place in the open. Communication is run
through the mailing list and all source code changes are tracked publicly.

* <strong>Mailing Lists</strong><br/>
  For Deltacloud API: [deltacloud-dev@incubator.apache.org](mailto:deltacloud-dev@incubator.apache.org).
  To subscribe to it, send an email to [deltacloud-dev-subscribe@incubator.apache.org](deltacloud-dev-subscribe@incubator.apache.org). You can also view [Archive][1] in case you are missing something.

  [1]: http://mail-archives.apache.org/mod_mbox/incubator-deltacloud-dev/
* <strong>IRC</strong><br/>
  You can also join us on the Freenode IRC channel #deltacloud. Deltacloud
  developers are generally available on the IRC channel
* <strong>Bugs</strong><br/>
  We track bugs in [Apache JIRA][2]. You can [view open bugs][view-bugs] or
  [file a new one][new-bug] there.

  [2]: https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/DTACLOUD
  [view-bugs]: https://issues.apache.org/jira/browse/DTACLOUD
  [new-bug]: https://issues.apache.org/jira/secure/CreateIssue!default.jspa
* <strong>Patches</strong><br/>
  Patches are very welcome. Please send them to the [development
  list][3]. Patches should be generated with [`git`&nbsp;`format-patch`][4]
  and sent to the list with [`git`&nbsp;`send-email`][5].
* <strong>Roadmap</strong><br/>
  We maintain our roadmap in
  [teambox](https://teambox.com/projects/deltacloud/task_lists) so that
  anyone can comment on tasks and suggest new ones.

  [3]: http://mail-archives.apache.org/mod_mbox/incubator-deltacloud-dev/
  [4]: http://kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/git-format-patch.html
  [5]: http://kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/git-send-email.html

Getting the sources
-------------------

Then Deltacloud Core gives you the API and drivers to various cloud providers.
It also provides a client library and a commandline interface.

The Deltacloud Core repository is hosted on Apache Incubator.
Apache uses Subversion, but there is a git mirror available:

    $ mkdir deltacloud
    $ cd deltacloud
    $ git clone git://git.apache.org/deltacloud.git core

You can find the Subversion repository at: <https://svn.apache.org/repos/asf/incubator/deltacloud>.

Required packages
-----------------
In order to make the Deltacloud components work, you'll need to
have the following packages installed (on Fedora 14; the names may vary on
your distro):

    ruby
    ruby-devel
    rubygem-rake
    gcc-c++
    libxml2-devel
    libxslt-devel

**Note:** these packages are necessary for building all the required ruby gems
that Deltacloud requires. If you want to install the gems using your system's
package manager (yum, apt, ports, etc.) you won't need to install these
packages manually.

To install all required ruby gems manually you should run:

    $ yum install rubygem-haml rubygem-sinatra rubygem-thin rubygem-json \
      rubygem-net-json rubygem-rack-accept rubygem-nokogiri rubygem-aws \
      rubygem-rest-client

Installing the Deltacloud Core
------------------------------

First, you need to install the server that will give you the Deltacloud API:

    $ cd path/to/deltacloud/core/server
    $ rake package
    $ sudo gem install pkg/deltacloud-core-<version>.gem

Then install the client library:

    $ cd path/to/deltacloud/core/client
    $ rake package
    $ sudo gem install pkg/deltacloud-client-<version>.gem

Once you have the client installed, run the following command:

    $ cd path/to/deltacloud/core/client
    $ rake fixtures
